Blog post: cffr (#289)
ropensci/roweb3: content/blog/2021-11-23-how-i-test-cffr/index.md

  - testthat
slug: how-i-test-cffr
tweet: How I test cffr on ~2,000 packages using GitHub Actions & R-universe by @dhernangomez
---

When GitHub announced [support for CITATION.cff
files](https://twitter.com/natfriedman/status/1420122675813441540) I though of
creating a package that would assist R developers in this matter. I was already
using [codemetar](https://docs.ropensci.org/codemetar/) for most of my packages,
so I was familiar with the creation of these kind of metadata files.

I borrowed some ideas from codemetar, although I decided to create most of my
code from scratch (I enjoy challenging myself, and there is no better way of
learning). Finally, the first working version of
[cffr](https://docs.ropensci.org/cffr/) was released on September 15, 2021.

## The challenge

One of the things I had always in mind is that cffr should be able to work with
any R package, no matter if it was available on CRAN, Bioconductor, the
[R-universe](/r-universe/) or exclusively on GitHub/GitLab. So when I finished
the initial version, I needed to test it with the largest possible number of
packages.

I started setting up a [testthat](https://testthat.r-lib.org/)[^1] test [in a
separate

> folder](https://github.com/ropensci/cffr/blob/main/tests/testthat/test_ci/test-full_cff.R),
> that I ignored in .Rbuildignore. This test was basically a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
folder](https://github.com/ropensci/cffr/blob/main/tests/testthat/test_ci/test-full_cff.R) which I ignored in .Rbuildignore. This test was basically a
```

was: **how do I achieve this?**

## The solution: Continuous Integration (CI)

The alternative approach seemed pretty obvious: using CI with GitHub Actions. So
basically I created [this
workflow](https://github.com/ropensci/cffr/blob/main/.github/workflows/test-ci.yaml)
integrating the previous script[^2].

[^2]: The workflow is derived from
    [r-lib/actions/tree/master/examples](https://github.com/r-lib/actions/tree/master/examples).

But still there were some open questions, such as: **how do I select a
meaningful sample of R packages?**

### Initial steps

The action
[`r-lib/actions/setup-r-dependencies`](https://github.com/r-lib/actions/tree/master/setup-r-dependencies)
was already included in my workflow, so I started using the `extra-packages`
option to install the tidyverse and tidymodels. I decided to start with these
two packages as they import some of the most popular R packages. Also, extra
points for `r-lib/actions/setup-r-dependencies` as it uses caching for the
installed packages, meaning that subsequent deploys would be significantly
faster.

So it was a good start in my quest to test cffr on a large sample of packages,

> but I was not still there...

Reviewer: ```suggestion
but I was still not there...
```

### Working with CRAN Task Views

Do you know [CRAN Task Views](https://cran.r-project.org/web/views/)? These are
useful collections of packages classified by relevant topics. With the
[ctv](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/ctv/index.html) package[^3], it is
quite straightforward to install the packages included in each of those views. I
decided then to install the core packages of all views, in order to increase my
package sample:

[^3]: Zeileis A (2005). "CRAN Task Views." *R News*, **5**(1), pp. 39--40.
    <https://CRAN.R-project.org/doc/Rnews/>

``` r
# Install core packages of all views
options(repos = c(
  CRAN = "https://cloud.r-project.org"
))

allviews <- ctv::available.views()
packs <- lapply(seq_len(length(allviews)), function(x) {
  allviews[[x]]$packagelist
})

packs <- dplyr::bind_rows(packs)
core <- dplyr::filter(packs, core == TRUE)
```

Out of interest, there are a total of **4,276** packages included in the CRAN
Task Views (in the `packs` object) and **286** core packages (in the `core`
object).

> ### Increasing the number with the r-universe

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Increasing the number with R-universe
```

Extracting a list of packages from an R-universe is as easy as:

``` r
# rOpenSci packages from R-universe
ropensci <- unlist(jsonlite::read_json("https://ropensci.r-universe.dev/packages"))
ropenscireviewtools <- unlist(jsonlite::read_json("https://ropenscireviewtools.r-universe.dev/packages"))

# r-lib packages
rlib <- unlist(jsonlite::read_json("https://r-lib.r-universe.dev/packages"))

# R-Forge packages
rforge <- unlist(jsonlite::read_json("https://r-forge.r-universe.dev/packages"))

# RStudio packages
rstudio <- unlist(jsonlite::read_json("https://rstudio.r-universe.dev/packages"))

# r-spatial packages
rspatial <- unlist(jsonlite::read_json("https://r-spatial.r-universe.dev/packages"))
```

And I joined all the retrieved packages into a single object `all`:

``` r
all <- sort(unique(c(core$name, ropensci, ropenscireviewtools, rlib, rforge, rstudio, rspatial)))
```

That makes a grand total of **925 packages**. At this point, I was quite happy
with the sample of packages, since it included a large set relevant packages.

## Final steps: installing the packages

I was almost there! Now, the last step was just to install these packages and
test them.

> With the aim of improving the performance, I filtered out the packages already

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the aim of improving performance, I filtered out the packages already
```

GitHub Actions. Thanks to caching, on a regular run the previous process of
installing packages takes less than 4 minutes on GitHub. That, in my opinion, is
more than satisfactory[^4].

[^4]: Note also the use of `type = "binary"`. The workflow runs on Windows and
    macOS, so in order to speed up the process I instructed to install the
    precompiled versions. For that very same reason, I didn't run this full test
    on Linux, since it would be necessary to compile every package from source.

Then, it was just a matter of running the first chunk presented in this blog
post as part of the GitHub Actions:

``` r
# Load package
devtools::load_all()
          
# Run the tests
testthat::test_dir("tests/testthat/test_ci")
```

I also created a step (named "Display results") that basically prints the output
of the Markdown report. The last bits were to include a scheduled run via
[cron](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/learn-github-actions/events-that-trigger-workflows#scheduled-events)
and to use the action
[`actions/upload-artifact@v2`](https://github.com/actions/upload-artifact) to
update the final report after each run.

See here an extract of the results of the last run:

> \`\`\` markdown \# Test ALL installed packages

Reviewer: I think this got messed up by my last suggestion, hopefully this fixes it? Double check that this section looks as it should (When the Checks are done, you'll see `deploy/netlify — Deploy Preview ready!`, then you can click on "Details" to see the preview website or got directly to your blog post here: https://deploy-preview-289--ropensci.netlify.app/blog/2021/11/23/how-i-test-cffr/)

```suggestion
``` markdown 
# Test ALL installed packages
```

    ## Sessioninfo 

    R version 4.1.2 (2021-11-01)
    Platform: x86_64-w64-mingw32/x64 (64-bit)
    Running under: Windows Server x64 (build 17763)

    Matrix products: default

    locale:
    [1] LC_COLLATE=C                          
    [2] LC_CTYPE=English_United States.1252   
    [3] LC_MONETARY=English_United States.1252
    [4] LC_NUMERIC=C                          
    [5] LC_TIME=English_United States.1252    

> \< omitted \>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
< omitted >
```

    ## Summary 

    [1] "testing a sample of 1930 installed packages"

    ---

    ## OK rate 

    [1] "99.74%"

    ---

    ## Errors 

> \< omitted \>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
< omitted >
```

    ...

> 

Reviewer: I would add ``` here (can't do it with a suggestion, unfortunately!

    [`bibentry()`](https://rdrr.io/r/utils/bibentry.html)? Maybe you use `meta`
    information from your DESCRIPTION or you use
    [`citation(auto = meta)`](https://rdrr.io/r/utils/citation.html)?*). This
    was the most difficult issue to solve when developing the package.

3.  There are differences between the accepted keys on `bibentry()`, BibTeX and
    the
    [`preferred-citation`](https://github.com/citation-file-format/citation-file-format/blob/main/schema-guide.md#preferred-citation)
    field of a CITATION.cff file. I tried to map those as best I could,
    suggestions welcomed!

[^5]: At the moment of writing, CRAN hosted **18,369 packages**, so the testing
    sample is \~10.5% of the overall number of packages on CRAN.

One thing I did after completing this process was to make use of the
`bibentry()` function instead of `citEntry()` in the inst/CITATION files of all
my packages. I chose this since the syntax is very similar to BibTeX, and the
function also provides guidance on the possible entry types, as well as specific
validity checks.

And that's all! If you have any suggestions for how to improve the current

> validation workflow, I would glad to hear it and include it in my checks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
validation workflow, I would be glad to hear it and include it in my checks.
```

---

> title: How I Test cffr on ~2.000 Packages using GitHub Actions and r-universe

Reviewer 2: With the font of the website for some reason the "~" is too high so it might make sense to use the word "about" instead?

Author: Modified

packages.

I started setting up a testthat [^1] test [on a separated
folder](https://github.com/ropensci/cffr/blob/main/tests/testthat/test_ci/test-full_cff.R),
that I ignored on .Rbuildignore. This test is basically a
[loop](https://github.com/ropensci/cffr/blob/6260303668303010c0c90ff381518960299a18f0/tests/testthat/test_ci/test-full_cff.R#L35:L61)
over [all the R packages installed
locally](https://github.com/ropensci/cffr/blob/6260303668303010c0c90ff381518960299a18f0/tests/testthat/test_ci/test-full_cff.R#L4:L7)
, where I create the corresponding `cff` object for each package and validate
it. Finally, the test creates a [small report in
Markdown](https://github.com/ropensci/cffr/blob/6260303668303010c0c90ff381518960299a18f0/tests/testthat/test_ci/test-full_cff.R#L64:L100)
with the summary of the results.

[^1]: Wickham H (2011). "testthat: Get Started with Testing." *The R Journal*,
    **3**, 5--10.
    <https://journal.r-project.org/archive/2011-1/RJournal_2011-1_Wickham.pdf>.

This setup was fine and worked locally, I just needed to run:

``` r
# Load package
devtools::load_all()
          
# Run the tests
testthat::test_dir("tests/testthat/test_ci")
```

> And voilá! The Markdown report is created on

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
And voilà! The Markdown report is created on
```
:nail_care: :wink:

Author: Isn't it nice to work with people of all around the world?

> And voilà! The Markdown report is created on

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And voilà! The Markdown report was created in
```

`tests/testthat/test_ci/_snaps/full_cff.md`.

However I was not completely comfortable with this setup. Locally, I have
installed \~200 packages, and it seemed to me like a small sample (CRAN hosts
more than 18,300 packages), so I needed to enlarge that sample. Also, I didn't
want to install more packages on my computer just for testing, so the question

> was: **how to achieve this?**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
was: **how do I achieve this?**
```

> ## The solution: Continuous Integration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## The solution: Continuous Integration (CI)
```

The alternative approach seemed pretty obvious: using CI with GitHub Actions. So
basically I created [this
workflow](https://github.com/ropensci/cffr/blob/main/.github/workflows/test-ci.yaml)
integrating the previous script[^2].

[^2]: The workflow is derived from
    [r-lib/actions/tree/master/examples](https://github.com/r-lib/actions/tree/master/examples).

> But still there were some open questions, as: **how to select a meaningful

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But still there were some open questions, such as: **how do I select a meaningful
```

sample of R packages?**

### Initial steps

The action
[`r-lib/actions/setup-r-dependencies`](https://github.com/r-lib/actions/tree/master/setup-r-dependencies)

> was already included on my workflow, so I started using the `extra-packages`
> option and installing the tidyverse and tidymodels. I decided to start with
> these two packages as they also import some of the most popular R packages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
was already included in my workflow, so I started using the `extra-packages`
option to install the tidyverse and tidymodels. I decided to start with
these two packages as they import some of the most popular R packages.
```

Also, extra points for `r-lib/actions/setup-r-dependencies` as it uses caching
for the installed packages, meaning that subsequent deploys would be
significantly faster.

So it was a good start in my quest to test cffr on a large sample of packages,
but I was not still there...

### Working with CRAN Task Views

> Do you know [CRAN Task Views](https://cran.r-project.org/web/views/)? This is an
> useful collection of packages classified by relevant topics. With the ctv

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Do you know [CRAN Task Views](https://cran.r-project.org/web/views/)? These are
useful collections of packages classified by relevant topics. With the [ctv](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/ctv/index.html)
```

> package[^3], it is quite straightforward to install the packages included on

Reviewer: ```suggestion
package[^3], it is quite straightforward to install the packages included in
```

each of those views. I decided then to install the core packages of all views,
in order to increase my package sample:

[^3]: Zeileis A (2005). "CRAN Task Views." *R News*, **5**(1), pp. 39--40.
    <https://CRAN.R-project.org/doc/Rnews/>

``` r
# Install core packages of all views
options(repos = c(
  CRAN = "https://cloud.r-project.org"
))

allviews <- ctv::available.views()
packs <- lapply(seq_len(length(allviews)), function(x) {
  allviews[[x]]$packagelist
})

packs <- dplyr::bind_rows(packs)
core <- dplyr::filter(packs, core == TRUE)
```

> For information, all the packages included on the CRAN Task Views are **4,276**
> (on the `packs` object). The core packages (the ones I selected on the `core`
> object) are **286** packages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Out of interest, there are a total of **4,276** packages included in the CRAN Task Views
(in the `packs` object) and **286** core packages (in the `core` object).
```

### Increasing the number with the r-universe

> [r-universe](/r-universe/) by [Jeroen Ooms](/author/jeroen-ooms/) is a wonderful
> project that, apart of the functionality of acting as a CRAN-like repo, includes
> several other components. One of those components is a specific [API
> Endpoint](https://ropensci.r-universe.dev/ui#api) for every r-universe with some
> very useful resources, as the ability of retrieving a [list of all the packages
> included in each r-universe](https://ropensci.r-universe.dev/packages)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[R-universe](/r-universe/) by [Jeroen Ooms](/author/jeroen-ooms/) is a wonderful
project that, apart of the functionality of acting as a CRAN-like repo, includes
several other components. One of those components is a specific [API
Endpoint](https://ropensci.r-universe.dev/ui#api) for every R-universe with some
very useful resources, such as the ability to retrieve a [list of all the packages
included in each R-universe](https://ropensci.r-universe.dev/packages).
```

> This fits perfectly on my needs, so my next step was to retrieve packages of
> selected r-universes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This fit perfectly with my needs, so my next step was to retrieve packages of
selected R-universes:
```

-   [rOpenSci](https://ropensci.r-universe.dev/)

> -   [R-lib](https://r-lib.r-universe.dev/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   [r-lib](https://r-lib.r-universe.dev/)
```

> -   [R-forge](https://r-forge.r-universe.dev/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   [R-Forge](https://r-forge.r-universe.dev/)
```

> -   [R-Studio](https://rstudio.r-universe.dev/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   [RStudio](https://rstudio.r-universe.dev/)
```

> -   [rspatial](https://r-spatial.r-universe.dev/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   [r-spatial](https://r-spatial.r-universe.dev/)
```

> I selected this well-known organizations as they hosts also a lot of popular
> packages among use**R**s. Also, my hope was that other developers would have
> checked at some point the DESCRIPTION and the inst/CITATION of any of these
> packages as the starting point for developing their own (as I usually do 😁), so
> these packages could be considered representative enough.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I selected these well-known organizations as they host a lot of popular
packages among use**R**s. Also, my hope was that other developers would have
at some point checked the DESCRIPTION and the inst/CITATION of many of these
packages as the starting point for developing their own (as I usually do 😁), so
these packages could be considered representative enough.
```

> Extracting a list of package of a r-universe is as easy as:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Extracting a list of packages from an R-universe is as easy as:
```

``` r

> # rOpenSci packages from r-universe

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# rOpenSci packages from R-universe
```

ropensci <- unlist(jsonlite::read_json("https://ropensci.r-universe.dev/packages"))
ropenscireviewtools <- unlist(jsonlite::read_json("https://ropenscireviewtools.r-universe.dev/packages"))

> # R-lib packages

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# r-lib packages
```

rlib <- unlist(jsonlite::read_json("https://r-lib.r-universe.dev/packages"))

> # R-forge packages

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# R-Forge packages
```

rforge <- unlist(jsonlite::read_json("https://r-forge.r-universe.dev/packages"))

> # R-Studio packages

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# RStudio packages
```

rstudio <- unlist(jsonlite::read_json("https://rstudio.r-universe.dev/packages"))

> # rspatial packages

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# r-spatial packages
```

rspatial <- unlist(jsonlite::read_json("https://r-spatial.r-universe.dev/packages"))
```

> And I joined all the retrieved packages on a single object `all`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And I joined all the retrieved packages into a single object `all`:
```

``` r
all <- sort(unique(c(core$name, ropensci, ropenscireviewtools, rlib, rforge, rstudio, rspatial)))
```

That makes a grand total of **925 packages**. At this point, I was quite happy
with the sample of packages, since it included a large set relevant packages.

## Final steps: installing the packages

I was almost there! Now, the last step was just to install these packages and
test them.

With the aim of improving the performance, I filtered out the packages already
installed on the system like this:

``` r
# Check packages not installed yet
instpack <- as.character(installed.packages()[, "Package"])
toinstall <- setdiff(all, instpack)
```

> I decided also to install most of the packages directly from CRAN, except those
> belonging to rOpenSci. For these packages, I decided to use the r-universe
> server, so I would have a mix of CRAN and r-universe packages on my sample for
> testing purposes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I also decided to install most of the packages directly from CRAN, except those
belonging to rOpenSci. For these packages, I decided to use the R-universe
server, so I would have a mix of CRAN and R-universe packages in my sample for
testing purposes:
```

> The following script does that trick:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following script does the trick:
```

``` r
# Install
options(repos = c(
  ropensci = "https://ropensci.r-universe.dev",
  ropenscireviewtools = "https://ropensci-review-tools.r-universe.dev",
  CRAN = "https://cloud.r-project.org"
))

install.packages(toinstall,
  dependencies = TRUE,
  verbose = TRUE, quiet = TRUE,
  type = "binary"
)

# Update
update.packages(type = "binary")
```

> Note that I installed the packages using `dependencies = TRUE"`. This forces the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that I installed the packages using `dependencies = TRUE`. This forces the
```

> installation of the packages on Depends, Imports and Suggest, so by doing this I
> was increasing substantially the overall number of packages installed on my
> GitHub Actions. Thanks to caching, on a regular run the previous process of
> installing packages takes less than 4 minutes on GitHub that, in my opinion, is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
installation of the packages from Depends, Imports and Suggest, so by doing this I
was substantially increasing the overall number of packages installed by my
GitHub Actions. Thanks to caching, on a regular run the previous process of
installing packages takes less than 4 minutes on GitHub. That, in my opinion, is
```

more than satisfactory[^4].

[^4]: Note also the use of `type = "binary"`. The workflow runs on Windows and
    macOS, so in order to speed up the process I instructed to install the
    precompiled versions. For that very same reason, I didn't run this full test
    on Linux, since it would be necessary to compile every package from source.

> Then, it was just a matter of running again the first chunk presented in the
> post also in GitHub Actions:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then, it was just a matter of running the first chunk presented in this blog
post as part of the GitHub Actions:
```

``` r
# Load package
devtools::load_all()
          
# Run the tests
testthat::test_dir("tests/testthat/test_ci")
```

> I created also a final step (named "Display results") that basically prints the
> output of the Markdown report. The lasts bits were to include a scheduled run
> via
> [cron](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/learn-github-actions/events-that-trigger-workflows#scheduled-events)
> and the use of the action
> [`actions/upload-artifact@v2`](https://github.com/actions/upload-artifact) for
> updating the final report after each run.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I also created a step (named "Display results") that basically prints the
output of the Markdown report. The last bits were to include a scheduled run
via
[cron](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/learn-github-actions/events-that-trigger-workflows#scheduled-events)
and to use the action
[`actions/upload-artifact@v2`](https://github.com/actions/upload-artifact) to
update the final report after each run.
```

See here an extract of the results of the last run:

> ``` markdown
> # Test ALL installed packages
> 
>     
>     
>     ## Sessioninfo 
>     
>     R version 4.1.2 (2021-11-01)
>     Platform: x86_64-w64-mingw32/x64 (64-bit)
>     Running under: Windows Server x64 (build 17763)
>     
>     Matrix products: default
>     
>     locale:
>     [1] LC_COLLATE=C                          
>     [2] LC_CTYPE=English_United States.1252   
>     [3] LC_MONETARY=English_United States.1252
>     [4] LC_NUMERIC=C                          
>     [5] LC_TIME=English_United States.1252    
>     
>    
> < omitted >
> 
>     
>     
>     ## Summary 
>     
>     [1] "testing a sample of 1930 installed packages"
>     
>     ---
> 
> 
>     
>     ## OK rate 
>     
>     [1] "99.74%"
>     
>     ---
> 
> 
>     
>     
>     ## Errors 
>     
> < omitted >
>     
>     ...
> ```

Reviewer: I'm sure this isn't exactly the way it looks, but it saves a bit of space.

```suggestion
``` markdown
# Test ALL installed packages 
    
    ## Sessioninfo 
    
    R version 4.1.2 (2021-11-01)
    Platform: x86_64-w64-mingw32/x64 (64-bit)
    Running under: Windows Server x64 (build 17763)
    
    Matrix products: default
    
    locale:
    [1] LC_COLLATE=C                          
    [2] LC_CTYPE=English_United States.1252   
    [3] LC_MONETARY=English_United States.1252
    [4] LC_NUMERIC=C                          
    [5] LC_TIME=English_United States.1252    
    
< omitted >   
    
    ## Summary 
    
    [1] "testing a sample of 1930 installed packages"
    
    ---
    
    ## OK rate 
    
    [1] "99.74%"
    
    ---
    
    ## Errors 
    
< omitted >
    
    ...
```
```

## The result

At this stage, I was ready to check cffr with a broad number of packages. This
workflow has been really useful for detecting corner cases not initially covered

> on the first release, so after several iterations now I feel comfortable with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in the first release, so after several iterations I now feel comfortable with
```

the compatibility of cffr with a large number of representative R packages.

On subsequent runs (once the packages are cached) the whole workflow run takes
\~13 minutes on Windows and \~8 minutes on macOS. This allows me to rapidly test
any improvement of the package.

> ## Lessons learned

Reviewer 2: very cool tech note!

After validating the metadata of hundreds of packages, there are some thoughts
that I would like to share:

> 1.  cffr was able to produce valid `cff` object for **1,925 packages** out of
>     1,930[^5]. I opened a couple of
>     [pull](https://github.com/selva86/InformationValue/pull/5)
>     [requests](https://github.com/ropensci/photosearcher/pull/13) on some of the
>     failing packages were I saw a clear mistake on the metadata. So in some way
>     this exercise could be used also to improve other packages by detecting
>     typos, etc. on the metadata.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1.  cffr was able to produce valid `cff` objects for **1,925 packages** out of
    1,930[^5]. I opened a couple of
    [pull](https://github.com/selva86/InformationValue/pull/5)
    [requests](https://github.com/ropensci/photosearcher/pull/13) on some of the
    failing packages where I saw a clear mistake in the metadata. So in some ways
    this exercise could be also used to improve other packages by detecting
    typos, etc. in the metadata.
```

2.  The DESCRIPTION files are [pretty
    standardized](https://cran.r-project.org/doc/manuals/r-release/R-exts.html#The-DESCRIPTION-file)
    and usually they are not a problem for cffr. However,
    [inst/CITATION](https://cran.r-project.org/doc/manuals/r-release/R-exts.html#CITATION-files)
    are tricky (*Do you have a inst/CITATION? Do you still use
    [`citEntry()`](https://rdrr.io/r/utils/citEntry.html) instead of
    [`bibentry()`](https://rdrr.io/r/utils/bibentry.html)? Maybe you use `meta`

>     information of your DESCRIPTION or you use

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    information from your DESCRIPTION or you use
```

    [`citation(auto = meta)`](https://rdrr.io/r/utils/citation.html)?*). This
    was the most difficult issue to solve when developing the package.

3.  There are differences between the accepted keys on `bibentry()`, BibTeX and
    the
    [`preferred-citation`](https://github.com/citation-file-format/citation-file-format/blob/main/schema-guide.md#preferred-citation)

>     field of a CITATION.cff file. I tried to map those the best I can,

Reviewer: An expression :grin:
```suggestion
    field of a CITATION.cff file. I tried to map those as best I could,
```

    suggestions welcomed!

[^5]: At the moment of writing, CRAN hosted **18,369 packages**, so the testing

>     sample is \~10.5% of the overall number of packages in CRAN.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    sample is \~10.5% of the overall number of packages on CRAN.
```

> One thing I did after completing this process is to make use of the `bibentry()`
> function instead of `citEntry()` on the inst/CITATION files of all my packages.
> I chose this since the syntax is very similar to BibTeX, and the function
> additionally provides guidance on the possible entry types, as well as specific
> validity checks for each entry type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One thing I did after completing this process was to make use of the `bibentry()`
function instead of `citEntry()` in the inst/CITATION files of all my packages.
I chose this since the syntax is very similar to BibTeX, and the function
also provides guidance on the possible entry types, as well as specific
validity checks.
```

> And that's all! If you have any suggestion on how to improve the current
> validation workflow, I would glad to include it on my checks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And that's all! If you have any suggestions for how to improve the current
validation workflow, I would glad to hear it and include it in my checks.
```
